Title: Weeknotes (2023 week 42)
Date: 2023-10-18
Categories: Django, Programming, Weeknotes, feincms

## Vacation in Italy

We have spent a wonderful family week in Italy. The voyage by train was very
comfortable and we had a great time there. I have lived close to lakes all my
life but the sea is always something else. Now I enjoy the cold temperatures of
fall.

## Going back (forward) to GitJournal

I have tried several note taking apps but I'm now back using
[GitJournal](https://gitjournal.io/) with a Git repository filled with Markdown
notes. It works well enough. I just wish that there was a way to make notes
more distinguishable and I wish that the editor was more forgiving when
encountering badly formatted checklists.

## Analog blogging

I have long wanted to write about [our switch from Slack to
Discord](https://406.ch/writing/why-we-switched-from-slack-to-discord-at-work/).
I have started to write this post with pen and paper. I find that I think
better when using pen and paper than when using the computer keyboard. One
factor is certainly that the computer offers more distractions, but I suspect
that another, more important factor is that as a fast typist the fingers and
the thinking are always getting out of step, and this happens less when using a
slower method of writing. This actually isn't an idea I had myself, but I don't
remember where I got it from.

## Zero-based versioning: Good or bad?

I discovered [ZeroVer](https://0ver.org/) sometime in the last few days. I have
many many Django packages with zero-based versions. Some of them have been used
in production for years now. I sometimes wonder if staying with `0.` is
unprofessional and I should just release 1.0 and be done with it or if it
doesn't really matter at all.

If I evaluate software packages more often than not I don't look at the version
number or the version numbering scheme (except when a package is still using
`0.0.`) when deciding whether to rely on it or not. The documentation and the
code itself are much more important to me.

## Releases

I haven't uploaded any releases in the last 14 days. That's good: I'm one of
those people who have made their passion their job (which is great) but that
sometimes makes it hard to not work at all since I can always tell myself that
I'm not working, that it's just a hobby.
