Title: Ungoogling my life
Categories:
Draft: remove-this-to-publish


I was dismayed (but unfortunately not really surprised) to see all the big tech
CEOs kiss the ring during the inauguration a few weeks back. I decided then
that I didn't want to subscribe to any products of these companies with my
personal money anymore. In my case, this meant only Google. I do have an iPhone
(the first iPhone since the 3GS or something) but I'm not paying any
subscriptions there either.

I have been a paying Google subscriber for years and years, starting in their
"Don't be evil" area and sticking with them as the product and the companies
ethics got worse and worse.


## GMail

I have switched my private mail to [Fastmail](https://www.fastmail.com/) a few
years ago, so I haven't been really using GMail anymore.

GMail is still a really good email service. In the last few weeks the AI
features have become hard to overlook and/or ignore though, and I'm not really
happy about that. Fastmail shows more restraint in this area.


## Google Calendar

We have shared family calendars using Google Calendar. Now I do not have a
private calendar anymore, and am using the Work calendar for everything. That's
a small setback. Fastmail also has a calendar functionality but sharing
read/write calendars doesn't seem to be easily possible except if others are in
the same account.


## Google Drive and Google Photos

I don't miss the Drive all that much. The things I'm working on are versioned
with [Git](https://git-scm.com/), and since I'm switching from desktop to
notebook all the time anyway everything is already backuped and synced
everywhere. For everything else I have started renting a [Storage Box at
Hetzner](https://www.hetzner.com/de/storage/storage-box/). I'm paying a few
euros per month for 1 TiB of storage which is accessible by several protocols.


## Docs / Spreadsheets

[LibreOffice](https://www.libreoffice.org/) exists and fits my needs. Whenever
possible I use pen and paper or flat text files anyway.


## Maps

I have been a happy [OsmAnd](https://osmand.net/) subscriber anyway. I'm still
paying for it but have been using [Organic Maps](https://organicmaps.app/) more
often now, because the app feels faster and nicer.


## YouTube and YouTube Music

I'm very happy with [Bandcamp](https://bandcamp.com/) and have been buying
music there for years now. I don't think the app is great though.

I have tried several apps, and have now settled on
[foobar2000](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/foobar2000/id1072807669). It works
well and includes an FTP server which I can use to push the library from the
computer to the phone.

I looked into setting up by own streaming server but haven't gotten anywhere
with that project yet, and I'm not sure if I really want to pursue that.

On the computer I'm back to using
[Rhythmbox](https://wiki.gnome.org/Apps/Rhythmbox).

Not having a YouTube subscription is great, because all the ads are so annoying
that I'm spending less time on YouTube than I did in years. And if I really
want to watch something [yt-dlp](https://github.com/yt-dlp/yt-dlp) exists and
works well.


## Other things

I have been playing [Ingress](https://ingress.com/) for over 10 years. It
didn't immediately click that I also deleted that account with my Google
account. I'm still a bit sad when thinking about all the badges I lost, but it
has been definitely worth it.

Google Keep has worked well for me for small To Dos, reminders and notes. I
haven't found an acceptable replacement yet; Apple Notes works somewhat, but
cannot be accessed on the web if you're using their advanced data protection
feature. Maybe I need a To Do app, but this space is so crowded that I don't
even want to start searching for something with fits my needs.

At work we're still using Google Workspace. It would probably be in our
interest to change that though.
