Title: Avoiding empty JavaScript files in CSS-only entrypoints from rspack builds
Categories: Programming

I [previously wrote about my preferred way of integrating Django with rspack](https://406.ch/writing/how-i-m-bundling-frontend-assets-using-django-and-rspack-these-days/). Minor aspects have changed, but most of it still applies.


## What changed

The largest change is probably that I have switched from `HtmlWebpackPlugin` to rspack's own [`HtmlRspackPlugin`](https://rspack.rs/plugins/rspack/html-rspack-plugin) and have stopped configuring the template generated by it. Instead, I'm pulling out link, script, and style tags [the Cthulhu way](https://blog.codinghorror.com/parsing-html-the-cthulhu-way/)[^parsing]. My own mistakes while configuring rspack have led to missing or duplicated assets. Letting rspack do its thing and post-processing the result feels safer.

[^parsing]: It's mostly fine in this case since the output is very limited and well-structured -- we don't have to guard against invalid HTML.

The rest basically stayed the same.


## `RemoveEmptyJsAssetsPlugin`

Poking around in rspack's compiler hooks isn't documented all that well, so I'm documenting this plugin here. It's very specific, but being able to change rspack's output may be useful to others and to my future self.

When using a CSS-only entrypoint or when listing CSS files in `entry`, rspack sometimes decides it wants to generate an empty JavaScript file. This wouldn't be a problem in and of itself, but since we're also letting rspack generate the associated script tag, we will make the browser download this empty script file unnecessarily. I didn't find a good way to avoid these empty files, and the `RemoveEmptyScriptsPlugin` for Webpack doesn't work with rspack anymore. The [discussion](https://github.com/web-infra-dev/rspack/discussions/6189) hasn't gone anywhere yet. So, I had to use my own plugin. Since I'm already copying the `rspack.library.js` file into each project, adding a plugin there is no headache.

    :::javascript
    class RemoveEmptyJsAssetsPlugin {
      apply(compiler) {
        compiler.hooks.emit.tap(this.constructor.name, (compilation) => {
          const emptyJsFiles = new Set(
            Object.entries(compilation.assets)
              .filter(([name, asset]) => /\.js$/.test(name) && asset.size() === 0)
              .map(([name]) => name),
          )

          for (const file of emptyJsFiles) {
            delete compilation.assets[file]
          }

          for (const filename of Object.keys(compilation.assets)) {
            if (!filename.endsWith(".html")) continue
            let html = compilation.assets[filename].source()
            for (const jsFile of emptyJsFiles) {
              const idx = html.indexOf(jsFile)
              if (idx < 0) continue
              const start = html.lastIndexOf("<script", idx)
              const end = html.indexOf("</script>", idx) + "</script>".length
              html = html.slice(0, start) + html.slice(end)
            }
            compilation.assets[filename] = new rspack.sources.RawSource(html)
          }
        })
      }
    }

The plugin has to be added to the plugins list:

    :::javascript

    plugins: [
      new RemoveEmptyJsAssetsPlugin(),
      // ...
    ],

And presto, no more empty JavaScript files!


## Closing

Ideally, rspack will handle this itself at some point and make the plugin obsolete. For now, it works without issues in several projects.
